# WebSharper 3.0 Upgrade Guide

This page describes the breaking changes to WebSharper from version 2.5 to version 3.0. It is intended as a guide to carry your WebSharper 2.x knowledge over to 3.0, or to convert an existing project. For new functionality introduced by WebSharper 3.0, please refer to the rest of the WebSharper documentation.

<a name="renamings"></a>
## Assembly and Namespace Renamings

**Summary**:

* Most namespaces and assembly names lose their `IntelliFactory` prefix.

* Some are normalized (eg. `Formlet` ⇒ `Formlets`).

* `Reactive` and `Formlets` are split off to separate repositories and NuGet packages.

* `IntelliFactory.Html` and `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Html` become `WebSharper.Html.Server` and `WebSharper.Html.Client`, respectively.

* `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Ecma`, `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Dom` and `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Html5` are merged into `WebSharper.JavaScript`.

**Detail**:

|:-|:-|:-|
|**The assembly**|**was renamed to**|Remarks|
|`IntelliFactory.Formlet`|`IntelliFactory.Formlets`|Moved to the project and NuGet package `WebSharper.Formlets`|
|`IntelliFactory.Html`|`WebSharper.Html.Server`| |
|`IntelliFactory.JavaScript`|`WebSharper.Core.JavaScript`| |
|`IntelliFactory.Reactive`|*(unchanged)*|Moved to the project and NuGet package `IntelliFactory.Reactive`.|
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper`|`WebSharper.Main`|The namespace is simply named `WebSharper`.|
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Collections`|`WebSharper.Collections`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Compiler`|`WebSharper.Compiler`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Control`|`WebSharper.Control`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Core`|`WebSharper.Core`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Dom`|`WebSharper.JavaScript`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Ecma`|`WebSharper.JavaScript`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Formlet`|`WebSharper.Formlets`|Moved to the project and NuGet package `WebSharper.Formlets`|
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Html`|`WebSharper.Html.Client`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Html5`|`WebSharper.JavaScript`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.InterfaceGenerator`|`WebSharper.InterfaceGenerator`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.JQuery`|`WebSharper.JQuery`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.MSBuild`|`WebSharper.MSBuild`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Sitelets`|`WebSharper.Sitelets`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Testing`|`WebSharper.Testing`| |
|`IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Web`|`WebSharper.Web`| |

## The namespace WebSharper.JavaScript

**Summary**: The new namespace `WebSharper.JavaScript` should be `open`ed when and only when writing a module that contains JavaScript-compiled code. It contains all facilities built in the browser: JavaScript language constructs, DOM, EcmaScript types (`RegExp`, `Date`, etc.) and HTML5 functionality. Types are defined directly inside this namespace (apart from DOM types which are under the `Dom` namespace) and globals are available under `JS`.

**Detail**:

* Types formerly defined in the namespaces `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.EcmaScript` and `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Html5` are now located in `WebSharper.JavaScript`.

* The namespace `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Dom` is renamed to `WebSharper.JavaScript.Dom`.

* The module `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.JavaScript` is renamed to `WebSharper.JavaScript.JS`. It is not intended to be `open`ed, hence the short name.

* The class `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.EcmaScript.Global` is renamed to `WebSharper.JavaScript.JS`.

* `JavaScript.Log`, `Window.Self` and `Document.Current` are deprecated and replaced with `Console.Log`, `JS.Window` and `JS.Document`, respectively.

* The auto-opened module `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Pervasives` is split between:
    * `WebSharper.Pervasives` for general definitions (eg. attributes such as `[<JavaScript>]`).
    * `WebSharper.JavaScript.Pervasives` for client-side specific definitions (eg. dotted operators, `New` and `=>`, `As<_>` and `X<_>`).

<a name="interop"></a>
## JavaScript representation of functions

The types used to pass functions to and from external JavaScript have changed. Delegate types are no longer supported for creating JavaScript functions using the `this` argument. Instead, the following types represent JavaScript functions:

* `unit -> 'Result` for functions with 0 argument that do not use `this`.

* `'Arg -> 'Result` for functions with 1 argument that do not use `this`.

* `FuncWithThis<'This, 'Func>` for functions that use `this`. `'Func` can be a straight F# function or another interop type.

* `FuncWithArgs<'Args, 'Result>` for functions with n arguments that do not use `this`. `'Args` must be a tuple type.

* `FuncWithRest<..., 'Rest, 'Result>` for functions that take some fixed arguments, and then a variadic array of the remaining arguments. The number of fixed arguments can be between 0 and 6.

* `FuncWithArgsRest<'Args, 'Rest, 'Result>` for the rare case of a variadic function with more than 6 fixed arguments. `'Args` is a tuple type of the fixed arguments.

However it is rarely necessary to use these types explicitly. As shown [below](#wig), WIG automatically wraps tupled functions into the correct interop type.

All `FuncWith*` types inherit from `WebSharper.JavaScript.Function`, ie. the EcmaScript `Function` type.

## EcmaScript types

In this section, `(Ecma)` refers to the namespace formerly named `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.EcmaScript`, now merged into `WebSharper.JavaScript`.

* All types from `(Ecma)` now inherit from `(Ecma).Object`.

* Methods from `(Ecma)` now return F# types such as `'T[]` and `string` instead of `(Ecma).Array<'T>` and `(Ecma).String`.

* The extension method `.ToEcma()`, which cast any value to `(Ecma).Object`, is replaced with an extension property `.JS`.

* This extension method is specialized for the types `string`, `'T[]`, `Exception`, `DateTime` and all number types to return their `(Ecma)` counterpart rather than `(Ecma).Object`.

## HTML combinator libraries

As mentioned [above](#renamings), the namespace `IntelliFactory.Html` for server-side markup is renamed to `WebSharper.Html.Server`, and the namespace `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Html` for client-side markup is renamed to `WebSharper.Html.Client`.

In addition, these two APIs are homogenized:

* Most tags and attributes are directly accessible by `open`ing the corresponding namespace. This means that attributes such as `Class` and `Id`, which were previously only available under `Attr` on the client, can now be used directly.

* Tags and attributes whose name collides with existing modules or common WebSharper idioms (such as `Option` or `Action`) are available under `Tags` and `Attr`, respectively. If you nevertheless experience a name collision with a type or a module, you can use a synonym:

    ```fsharp
    module Class =
        let x = 1

    open WebSharper.Html.Client

    // Problem:
    let x1 = Class.x // error FS0039: The field, constructor or member 'x' is not defined

    // Solution:
    module C = Class
    let x2 = C.x
    ```

* Creating a new tag is done with the function `NewTag`, which takes a string and a sequence of children/attributes.

* Creating a new attribute is done with the function `NewAttr`, which takes a name and a value as strings.

## Web Controls and Pagelets

* The interface `IPagelet`, which was implemented by `WebSharper.Html.Client` elements and attributes, is replaced with an abstract class `Pagelet`. It has the two same members `Body : Dom.Node` and `Render : unit -> unit`.

* The property `Element.Body` does not have type `Dom.Element` anymore, but `Dom.Node`, because it is the implementation of the abstract method from `Pagelet`. If you need to access an `Element`'s body as a `Dom.Element` (for exemple to pass it to `JQuery.Of`), you can use the field `Element.Dom`.

* The `Body` of a `Web.Control` no longer has type `IPagelet` (nor `Pagelet`), but a new interface `IControlBody`. This interface has a single member `ReplaceInDom : Dom.Node -> unit`. This interface is more general than `Pagelet`, since it does not mandate the control to be composed of a single node. It is of course implemented by `Pagelet`, so returning a `Pagelet` as the body of a control is still as easy as upcasting it with `:> _`.

<a name="wig"></a>
## Interface Generator

* Members:

    * Members are now immutable.

    * Static class members are added with `|+> Static [...]` instead of `|+> [...]`.

    * Instance class members are added with `|+> Instance [...]` instead of `|+> Protocol [...]`.

    * Interface members are still added with `|+> [...]`.

* Functions as arguments, return values and property values are exposed as normal F# functions and are converted to and from the appropriate underlying [interop type](#interop). Functions that do not use `this` are still exposed as a simple function taking a tuple of arguments. However, functions that do use `this` (declared in WIG using the operator `-*`) are not exposed as a delegate anymore, but as a function with two arguments: the first argument is `this`, and the second is a tuple of the actual function arguments.

    The automatic conversion between F# function types and interop types is only active when there is no explicit inlining using the combinators `WithInline`, `WithGetterInline` and `WithSetterInline`. For example:

    ```fsharp
    "onclick" => (Element * Event ^-> T<unit>)?f ^-> T<unit>
    // Generated method:
    //   [<Inline "$this.onclick($wsruntime.CreateFuncWithArgs($f))">]
    //   member Onclick : (Element * Event -> unit) -> unit

    "OnClick1" => (Element * Event ^-> T<unit>)?f ^-> T<unit>
    |> WithInline "$this.onclick($f)"
    // Generated method:
    //   [<Inline "$this.onclick($f)">]
    //   member OnClick1 : FuncWithArgs<Element * Event, unit> -> unit
    ```

    If you need to inline a method that takes or returns functions, or a function-typed property, you can use the `Interop` variant of the inlining combinators. They provide a function that takes a parameter name and performs the automatic conversion:

    ```fsharp
    "OnClick2" => (Element * Event ^-> T<unit>)?f ^-> T<unit>
    |> WithInteropInline (fun p -> sprintf "$this.onclick(%s)" (p "f"))
    // Generated method:
    //   [<Inline "$this.onclick($wsruntime.CreateFuncWithArgs($f))">]
    //   member OnClick2 : (Element * Event -> unit) -> unit -> unit
    ```

* Properties and function return types using unions (eg. `T<int> + T<string>`) are compiled to `Choice` whenever the types are distinguishable at run time. It is possible to distinguish between:

    * One array type, or tuple types of different lengths;

    * One number type (including `DateTime` and `TimeSpan`, which are proxied as numbers);

    * `string`;

    * `bool`;

    * and at most one other object type.

    In any other case, `T<obj>` is used like in WebSharper 2.x.

* `Type.New()` is deprecated. It was mainly used for two purposes:

    * Self-reference: you can use `TSelf` instead.

    * Mutually recursive types: the recommended way is to name classes first and add members later:

    ```fsharp
    let Chicken' = Class "Chicken"
    let Egg =
        Class "Egg"
        |+> Instance [
            "hatch" => T<unit> ^-> Chicken'
        ]
    let Chicken =
        Chicken'
        |+> Instance [
            "lay" => T<unit> ^-> Egg
        ]
    ```

* Generic classes:

    ```fsharp
    /// WebSharper 2.5:

    let MyGenericClass : Type -> TypeDeclaration =
        Generic / fun t ->
            Class "MyGenericClass"

    let ClassUsingMyGenericClass : TypeDeclaration =
        Class "MyOtherClass"
        |+> Protocol [
            "myMethod" => MyGenericClass T<int> ^-> T<unit>
        ]

    let Namespace =
        Namespace "MyLibrary" [
            Generic - MyGenericClass
            ClassUsingMyGenericClass
        ]

    /// WebSharper 3.0:

    let MyGenericClass : TypeDeclaration =
        Generic - fun t ->
            Class "MyGenericClass"

    let ClassUsingMyGenericClass : TypeDeclaration =
        Class "MyOtherClass"
        |+> Instance [
            "myMethod" => MyGenericClass.[T<int>] ^-> T<unit>
        ]

    let Namespace =
        Namespace "MyLibrary" [
            MyGenericClass
            ClassUsingMyGenericClass
        ]
    ```

## User Session in Sitelets and RPC functions

The module `IntelliFactory.WebSharper.Sitelets.UserSession` has been deprecated because it is thread-unsafe: its functions need to be called from the same thread as the request, which is not guaranteed in Sitelets. Instead, it is replaced by a value of type `IUserSession`, accessible safely from the sitelet context and RPC functions. See [Web Context](WebContext.md) for more information.
